All right, welcome back everybody. Today
we are going to be breaking down a
system design interview classic. We're
going to be designing a rate limiter. Uh
especially if you're new to system
design, this is a fantastic place to
start. It's a good problem to get
familiar with. It's still incredibly
popular at many of the top companies.
It's asked a lot at Microsoft, for
example, and many users recently have
been reporting that it's being asked at
OpenAI lately, too. Uh now, for those of
you who are new to the channel, I'm
Evan. I'm a former meta staff engineer
and I'm the co-founder of Hello
Interview. Hello Interview is a platform
that helps people just like you prepare
for upcoming software engineering
interviews. And so if you haven't
already, head over there, check it out.
Now, if videos aren't your thing, we
have detailed written writeups on this
problem, designing a rate limiter, as
well as 26 others. You can see them all
here. We also have foundational core
concepts, deep dives into technologies,
patterns that we think are important to
know for system design, as well as
plenty of content on DSA, behavioral,
salary negotiation, interview guides.
You got it or you name it, we got it.
Um, now you can also try this problem
yourself using our guided practice. And
so you can come here, fill things out
step by step, record your answer, get
feedback, and this is going to be
evaluating your design in real time for
each question along the way, letting you
know what you did well, and of course
the things that you can do in order to
improve. So feel free to give that a go.
The overwhelming majority of the content
is free, guided practice. Everybody gets
one for free from then on.
Unfortunately, it's only for premium
members. Hope you understand. All right,
without further ado, let's get after it.
Well, what even is a rate limiter?
Chances are most of you are already
familiar, but it's good for us to go
over it so that we have a a shared
understanding before we design the
system. Rate limiters control how many
requests a client can make in a specific
time frame. And so, think about you have
a social media app. Users are making
requests in order to view news feeds,
update posts, etc. And the rate limiter
limits them to something like, for
example, 100 requests per minute per
user. And the whole point here is to
protect our backend. It's to protect our
services so that users can't come and
abuse our system, spamming us with
thousands of requests that ultimately
might take down our system or make it
unusable for other users. So that's what
a rate limiter is. Now, before we jump
into designing it, as we always do in
these videos, we're going to outline the
framework that we're going to follow
both in this video and that I suggest
that you follow in any of your real
system design interviews. And so this is
the hello interview delivery framework.
We suggest you go step by step through
these steps starting first with your
requirements. This is where we're going
to define both the functional
requirements or the features of the
system as well as the non-functional
requirements or the qualities of the
system. We're also going to outline some
of the core entities. These are usually
the nouns of your of your system. These
are the uh the rows that you're storing
or the um the tables, excuse me, in your
database. The things that are exchanged,
the resources in your APIs, that's our
core entities. And then we'll do either
API or system interface. In the case of
a rate limiter, which is like a a
back-end component, you know, the
client's not necessarily interacting
with it directly. We're going to focus
on the system interface. Um, for some
system design interviews, data flow
makes sense. You could have it make
sense here in designer rate limiter.
think we'll probably skip it and we'll
go right to the highle design where the
goal of the highle design is to head
over to the whiteboard, draw some boxes
and arrows in order to satisfy those
core functional requirements of the
system. And so in other words, get a
minimal design down early in your system
design interview that's able to fulfill
the basic features of the system. And
then from there, we can move on to our
deep dives where we're going to layer on
complexity by satisfying our
nonfunctional requirements such that our
final design has everything it needs to
be able to scale, be low latency, fault
tolerance, all of those things that are
really important. And so you'll watch me
walk through this step by step. We'll do
it together and we'll have some fun.
for rate limiter specifically. Let's
jump right in then with our functional
requirements. Again, functional
requirements. Functional requirements
are the features of the system. Now, for
userf facing applications, this is
usually pretty straightforward. A user
can write a post, a user can view a
feed, whatever it may be. Uh, in the
case of these backend components, it's
sometimes a little bit more abstract,
but I think it's still rather clear what
needs to happen here. And so, I'm going
to do this in order of when a request
comes in. Well, the first thing is that
the the the application the rate limiter
here needs to be able to identify users
by you know something. In our case,
maybe this is their ID, their IP or even
an API key, right? So, the most
important thing is the rate limiter
needs to know who is this because I need
to determine whether or not I should
limit them based on how many requests
they've already made. So, that's step
one. The second thing and the most
important thing is that we need to be
able to limit requests, right? We need
to be able to limit requests and these
should be based on configurable rules.
And so a configurable rule here might be
that any user can only make a 100
requests per minute, maybe even to a
specific endpoint, right? And so we got
to identify a user and then we'll limit
the requests that that user can make
based on a set of configurable rules.
And then the last thing is that we want
to return proper error headers and
status codes to the user. And so we
don't want to be ambiguous here. We
don't want to just return a failure of
500 to the user and them have no idea
why. We want to tell them that they're
being rate limited and maybe even give
them some additional metadata so that
they can deduce how they should uh you
know move forward, what they should do
next. So those are our functional
requirements of our system at our core.
That's what we're designing. Now, before
you move on to the non-functional
requirements in your interview, my
suggestion to you is always check in
with your interviewer at this point and
ask them about the scale of the system.
Especially in the case of of a rate
limiter here, the scale is actually
really interesting and there's a lot of
questions that you'd want to ask. And
so, I would ask my interviewer, what am
I rate limiting? Is this a userfacing
application like a Facebook or
something? Is this some developer
tooling? Is this rate limits um between
intra microervices maybe within a
company? What am I rate limiting? And
now when I ask this question and as is
most popular, you're typically going to
be rate limiting some, you know, userf
facing application like a social media
app. And so we'll say that we have 100
million daily active users and that
means 1 million requests per second.
Okay? So we have 1 million requests per
second. Um, and we're going to be rate
limiting at that particular scale. Now,
one other thing I actually want to note
here is that when I ask this question,
this is kind of funny. Candidates would
always say to me, "Am I designing a
back-end rate limiter, uh, a serverside
rate limiter, or a client side rate
limiter?" And I'm going to be honest,
this question was always a little bit
confusing to me. It's like, of of course
we're designing a serverside rate
limiter. A client side rate limiter
maybe doesn't provide nearly as much
value in this case. It can obviously be
spoofed. You can't trust the clients to
limit themselves, right? And so I found
out that candidates were always asking
this because as I was doing some some
research to write up our breakdown of
this problem, I saw that most other
writeups online start with that the
server side or client side. Um, and so I
don't know, like I said, I think this is
a little silly. It's going to be server
side. There are realistic use cases
where client side provides some added
value, but I've almost never seen it
asked in an interview. Um, so bit of a
tangent or or an aside from me, but yes,
we're going to be doing a server side um
rate limiter that is going to rate limit
um for an application that has a 100
million daily active users and 1 million
requests per second. And so with that,
we can come to our non-functional
requirements.
And so non-functional requirements trip
up a lot of candidates. What is a
non-functional requirement first of all?
Well, if a functional requirement is the
features of a system, right? what does
the system need to be able to do? The
non-functional is how does it need to be
able to do it? And so this is where
there's all those illity statements,
right? This is where you're going to
talk about scalability, low latency,
durability, um even security, fault
tolerance. Now, if you head over to
hello.com under the delivery framework
section, we list off all the things that
you should consider in the
non-functional requirement. But most
importantly, you're not going to just
write all of those things. Everything
you write in the non-functional
requirements, you're expected to address
in your design. This is really crucial.
And so you're going to want to call out
the specific column illities, right?
Ilies, um, that are directly relevant to
this design. Okay? And so pick out the
ones that you think are most specific
and most interesting and we'll go
forward with those. And so the first
thing that you you want to consider in
your non-functional requirements is
always cap theorem. And so of course in
CAP theorem, we have consistency,
availability, and partition tolerance.
Partition tolerance is a must. So your
decision is always should my system be
strongly consistent meaning should every
single read be reading the latest write
or should we opt for high availability
and thus eventual consistency is fine.
Now in our case we're going to go for
availability over consistency. You can
think of this like if somebody was going
to push a new rule to our system, would
we rather that the rate limiter still
works even if it's reading outdated
rules for a bit while they're
propagating or should we have the rate
limiter basically go offline because we
need to wait until all rules have
propagated. That's one example of
availability versus consistency.
Clearly, we want to make sure that our
rate limiter is still always just up and
available and working because it's
protecting our system. Now, the second
thing that is uniquely interesting to a
rate limiter is low latency. And so in
any system design interview, a bad
candidate or I shouldn't say bad but
maybe a a less good candidate would come
in here and they would write this on the
board low latency. And I as the
interviewer would say like okay yes
systems it's good for a system to be low
uh have low latency but what do you mean
here? And now what a good candidate
would do is they would be specific and
they would say we have low latency rate
limit checks and even better we're going
to aim for under 10 milliseconds.
And so what they've done here is that
they've both quantified and they've also
qualified. So they said, I want low
latency in the case of a user making a
request. We don't want to add additional
latency to their request. And then we
want to make sure that we add less than
10 milliseconds. And this is what
they're going to try to design for. Now,
of course, this is really important in a
rate limiter because your rate limiter
is adding additional time to any request
from a user. that user requested
something like uh a post and we're going
to take time to first check if they're
allowed to view that post based on their
rate limits, but we don't want to take a
long time doing it. The user wants to
see that post quickly, right? So low
latency is important there.
And then we we sort of already implied
that this was important when we talked
about scale question above, but this
system needs to be scalable. So
scalability, right? So it needs to be
scalable scalable and we want to scale
again to quantify it to that 1 million
requests per second. And so the goal of
our functional and our non-functional
requirements is to agree with our
interviewer exactly on what we're
building. We're basically setting up
this contract with them saying that for
the rest of the interview, these are the
things that I'm going to fulfill. And
now I as the candidate can hold myself
accountable because if I get to the end
of the interview and I did all of these
things well, I kind of did all six of
these things here well, then I should
feel confident leaving the interview
like I passed and I nailed it. And
that's the general goal here. Um, and so
at this point, check in with your
interviewer. Ask them, is there anything
I'm missing? Is there anything you would
change? Otherwise, I'd love to continue
and move on to the next sections.
The next sections for us is the core
entities in the interface. Now, I'm
going to admit for these backend
components, this is slightly less
important again than a userfacing
application, but they do form a basis
and they're they're not steps I would
skip, but you can probably do them
frankly in in under a minute. And so,
let's do that. Let's kind of breeze
through them. What are the core entities
of a system like this? Well, the core
entities that you have is a request.
This is the request that's incoming. Uh
it's how you are going to determine who
is making the request, right? And so
like the who I'm going to call them a
client, but this is like your IP
address. This is your user ID, the
things that we talked about earlier,
maybe your API key, right? So you have a
request come in, you have a client, and
then you have rules. Of course, these
rules are the things like, you know, 100
requests per user per second, right? So
very simple. Those are the core entities
of our system. They're good for getting
us to wrap our head around what's going
on here. and they lead us nicely to what
would be either our API or a system
interface. Now I'm going to go with
system interface instead of API because
we want to choose API when we're doing a
userfacing application where users are
calling an API. Users are not calling an
API in this case. users are are calling
an API of for example our social media
app right get posts but it's us who are
checking the rate limiter and we're
doing this via probably an RPC call or
some internal call um which we can
define as our system interface and so
you can do this however you want I like
to do it kind of as a function call and
really it's just this one function that
we're implemented is this request
allowed right for this client ID in this
rule and we're going to return basically
Did it pass? You know, is that allowed?
True or false? Um, we should also return
though, if we look back to our
functional requirements, we wanted to
return some interesting stuff here. So,
the user knows what to do. And some of
those interesting things might be, you
know, how many remaining requests the
user may have if they do pass. Uh, as
well as like maybe what time it resets.
You know, this would depend on what our
algorithm is, which we'll get into in
more detail later. But this is the thing
that we're implementing, some function
that allows us to ask if a request
passes or not. And so if we zoom out
now, we should have a pretty good
understanding. This was our setup. We
have a good understanding of what we
want to build. We've done our
requirements, our entities, and our
interface. And it's time for us to head
over to the whiteboard, do the really
fun stuff, start drawing boxes and
arrows, nail down our highle design, and
then our deep dives.
As we get into our high level design, uh
the approach that we take here is
actually really simple and methodical.
You don't need to overthink this. You're
just going to go one by one through your
functional requirements in order to make
sure that we can satisfy each of them.
And so our first requirement is that the
system should be able to identify
clients by their user ID or IP address
or API key and so on. But importantly,
maybe before we can limit anyone,
there's two key questions that we need
to be able to to answer. And so I'll
write them over here so that we have
them in mind. The first is where should
our rate limiter live in our
architecture? Basically, where do we
place it? Right? And this is going to
determine what information we can access
and how it integrates with the rest of
the system. And then the second question
that we're going to need to be able to
answer is how should we identify
clients? And so based on those user ID,
IP address, uh API key, anything else,
what's the right way to identify a user?
And this assures that we of course apply
the rate the right rate limits to to any
given user. And so these two questions
here, they're closely linked. Your
placement choice is going to affect what
client information you can easily
access. And your identification strategy
influences where the rate limiter makes
the most sense to deploy. And so let's
start with with the first one here.
Where should we place the rate limiter?
That's the first thing that we're going
to answer. And we have three main
options. Now the first option is pretty
maybe obvious and we can start with the
simplest thing. Let me draw out why is
that so thick? Uh let me draw out what
our basic system could look like. Right?
So we're going to have some client.
We're going to have a microser
architecture because we have some large
system here like our um uh uh what did
we call it? Social media app. Excuse me.
Hard to type and think.
And so here's just our really basic
setup. Okay, clients make requests to
our social media app. It goes to our
gateway. Our gateway then forwards that
on and routes it to the appropriate
micros service. That micros service does
its thing and returns back to the
client. Okay, so there's the basics of
our social media app. And now we need to
stick a rate limiter somewhere. We
talked about putting a rate limiter on
the client doesn't make as much sense.
We alluded to that in the beginning. So
we need some uh rate limiter back here
in the back end or in server code. So
where can we place it? The first option,
I'll make it blue here, is that we can
put our rate limiters directly inside
each of our respective
microservices. Right now in this setup,
it's just part of your application code.
And so when a request comes in, the
server is going to check its local
memory for the current counts for any
given user. It'll update them and then
decide whether to allow or reject the
request. Now the good thing is this
approach is extremely fast. Everything
is happening in memory. There's no
network calls. There's no external
dependencies. But the downside I think
is is really obvious. There's no global
picture. And so you can imagine that a
user makes two requests where one hits
microser one and one hits micros service
2. And in each case they both think that
only one request has come in. However,
of course, globally the user has made
two requests. And so the lack of
coordination makes this a really poor
option. And so what's the the second
thing we could do? Well, naturally, we
could pull this out and maybe make this
rate limiter its own service here,
right? Make it global. And so now, every
time a request comes into one of these
microservices, the first thing that
they're going to do is check with the
rate limiter and say, "Hey, am I allowed
to process this request?" Basically, is
this under our limits? And if yes,
they'll end up processing the request uh
and sending the results back to the
gateway or back to the client through
the gateway. And so this is great and
that it solves that global coordination
problem that we were worried about.
Wonderful. Um but it also is going to
introduce some excess latency. And so
now every single request that comes in
is going to go from the gateway to a
microser. The microser is then going to
make a network call to a separate
service, a separate server somewhere
which is your rate limiter which is
going to respond and then it's going to
do its thing and respond back to the
user. And so admittedly this is fairly
minimal. Um, but just keeping in mind we
had those tight latency requirements and
so we want to make sure this is as quick
as possible. Um, and this added network
overhead probably isn't worth it. And so
how can we keep that global picture but
maybe reduce the latency of that network
overhead. And now the the answer and
what is used in most production systems
is to actually just move the gateway
over here to the edge. And so we can
place it directly in either our API
gateway or our load balancer, whatever
component sits at the front of our
system at the edge of our system. And
now in this setup, every single incoming
request is going to hit our rate limiter
first. And so right before we determine
where to route this request to, we'll
just say, hey, can we even service this
request based on our our given limits?
Right? And so for those of you maybe who
like analogies, you can think of this
placement of our rate limiter like like
a bouncer at the club. I think is the
kind of silly but canonical example
here, right? And so troublemakers are
going to get turned away at the door,
not after they're already made it inside
and started to cause problems like was
the case in the previous approach.
Right? Now, this this still has some
some limitations. The first is around
scale, but that's fine. We'll talk to
that as we get to our non-functional
requirements. But more importantly, this
limits the amount of context that we
have. And so when we had the rate
limiter in our application code, we in
theory have context to everything about
our system. And so if you want to make
complex rate limiting rules like you
know rate limit somebody differently
based on whether they're a premium user
or something that was easy to do. But
now as we sit at the edge we only have
information that came in via the HTTP
request itself. So the headers, the URL,
the IP address and and any basic
authentication tokens that are present
in the actual request. we can't see that
deeper business logic that might exist
inside of our application code with
access to to some persistent storage
like a database. And so this is fine to
give that example again. Maybe we want
to to do the premium user thing. Premium
users get 10x higher rate limits. Um
it's still doable. We just need to make
sure that the fact that a user is a
premium user is encoded in the request.
This is typically via the JWT token
which is going to be in the headers. And
so anything the clients send over should
say in this case via the JWT that
they're a premium user. So we have that
context. We do our rate limiting. And
then our microservices can focus only on
servicing requests. They don't need to
know about anything about how we we rate
limit or whether we rate limit. Now we
want to answer that second question that
we outlined and that's how should we
identify clients. Well to be honest
we've kind of been talking about this
the whole time. We even put it directly
in our functional requirement with user
ID, IP, API key, etc. But this is
something that you're going to want to
bring up and talk to your interviewer
about. It's basically what makes a
client unique. And those are the three
main options. The user ID, the IP
address, or the API key. Uh, but this is
a perfect time to ask your interviewer
some questions. And I would ask them,
are all of our users authenticated? Is
this a developer API that's going to
require an API key? Etc. These are the
sorts of things that you might want to
ask. But in practice, and this would
maybe be the most impressive answer to
give your interviewer, is that we're
probably going to want a combination.
Maybe authenticated users get higher
rate limits than anonymous IP addresses.
Or as we talked about earlier, premium
users may get even more. This is a
reflection of your understanding of like
real world systems. And you're not going
to enforce just a global limit, but
probably have layers of multiple rules.
And so you might have Alice can make a
thousand requests per second. any given
IP address can make a 100 requests per
second. Uh an API can handle 50,000
requests per second. You know, whatever
it may be. So, we're going to be able to
identify all of these things, apply them
to different rules, and they're going to
be identified as we've talked about just
via the request, usually from the
request headers. Now, we can move on to
our second functional requirement where
it's the system should limit requests
based on configurable rules. And so this
is where we get to the heart of rate
limiting and that is the algorithm that
decides whether we should allow or
reject any given request. Now
importantly in system design interviews
this this being the algorithm isn't
actually usually the main focus of the
interview unlike is the case in
low-level design interviews. Now you're
still going to want to be able to
acknowledge that you know the different
options that you can weigh the different
trade-offs and explain and justify your
choice but you likely won't need to
implement it not even in pseudo code. So
with that said, there are many different
rate limiting algorithms, but I think
there's four that are worth you knowing.
And so let's start with the simplest and
we'll work our way up. The simplest is
what's known as the fixed window window
counter. And it's incredibly
straightforward. Users get n requests
per window. So for example, 100 requests
a minute. And for each user, we're going
to maintain a counter that resets at the
start of each window. If the counter
exceeds the limit during that window, we
reject the request. And so, let me I
probably should have pasted this in a
moment ago, but here is the diagram that
we have in the article to work with
here. And so, these are each window
interval. Requests come in. In this
simple diagram, it looks like we have
three requests per window until we start
to reject. You get to your fourth
request, it passes that threshold, and
we end up ultimately rejecting it. Um,
now the upside of this is that it's
really, really trivial to implement. You
just need a hash table that can map your
client IDs to counter and window start
pairs. And so that hash table might Oh,
let's see if I can copy that better.
That hash table might look something
like this, right? Where you just have
Alice at 12, she had 100 requests. At
12:01, she had five requests. Bob,
Charlie, Dave, Eve, and Frank,
respectively. So really really really
easy to implement. But the downside is
what we end up calling the boundary
effect. And so a user can make a 100
requests at 1201 and 59 seconds. And
then at 1202 they can make 100 more
requests because they went on either
side of the boundary here. And thus they
ended up in effect making 200 requests
in just 2 seconds, right? Which which
isn't great. The other thing is that
there's the option for starvation. And
so if you made your 100 requests at
12:01 and 1 seconds, now you have to
wait 59 seconds until you can make any
requests at all, which depending on your
needs might also be a problem. Now the
second approach is called the sliding
window log. Sliding Why am I blue?
Sliding window log. And it basically
just smooths out the issues that we had
with the fixed winner counter. And so
let me get this new drawing in here for
you. Right? And as the name implies, we
have the sliding window. And so as
requests come in, we keep track of this
rolling window over the last minute. And
we just say something like we can only
have 100 requests in the last rolling
minute. Right now, this eliminates the
boundary effects and the burst problem
from the fixed window counter that we
had over here because it tracks the
exact time of each request, which is
going to give you that perfect accuracy.
However, the downside here is that this
is typically implemented implemented
with a heap or a deck. Um, and this is
going to require a ton more memory. And
so, if you have a ton of users, this is
going to be tons more memory. Um, it's
more memory per users and it's going to
need a bunch more instances and it's
going to be more expensive. So, that's
the potential downside here. So, the
third algorithm addresses the memory
issues that we have with the sliding
window log um by using what we call a
sliding window counter. And it's
basically the the sliding window log but
with some mild optimization so that we
don't have to keep every single time
stamp that comes in in something like a
heap. Right? We can be clever and
instead just keep two counters. One for
the previous fixed window and one for
the current window we're in right now.
And now the key is that we estimate what
a true sliding window would look like uh
by weighing these two fixed windows
based on how far we are into the current
window. And so let me just show you an
example. I have an example written here
that I can paste in. And so imagine that
the previous window from 1 minute to 1
minute 1 second had eight requests. And
now we're 42 seconds or 70% into our
second window. And so far we have six
requests. Well, should we accept the
next request? Right. Well, here's the
math. Given that we're 70% through the
minute, we can take our current requests
as well as 30% of the last window,
right? 30% of the last window. This is
us estimating how many more should we
get in the remaining 30% of the window,
right? This is going to estimate that
we're at 8.4. Now, if our limit was 10,
we could say 8.4 is less than 10 and
thus we should pass. And the great thing
here is that this gives us much better
accuracy than those fixed windows, but
we only need to use two integers per
user. We don't need to keep a whole heap
per user, right? So downside, it's an
approximation. Uh it's not perfect. It's
not going to be perfectly evenly or
excuse me, it's an approximation and it
assumes that requests are pretty
perfectly evenly spread across each of
these windows, which aren't necessarily
the case. But if you can handle this
approximation, it's a pretty decent
option.
Now, the last option and and the one
that is is arguably most popular and the
one that we're probably going to go with
is what's called the token bucket. So,
let me paste in my cute little drawing
here. Hopefully, you guys like this one,
right? But you can think of it as each
client has their own bucket that holds a
certain number of tokens. And these
number of tokens in the bucket, they're
the burst capacity. Okay? And now at the
same time, token tokens are being added
to the bucket at a steady rate. And
these are called the refill rate. And
every time a request comes in, we
consume one token. If there are no
tokens available, then the request is
rejected. Right? So that sounds a little
confusing, but it accomplishes two
things really nicely. The size of your
bucket is how you handle bursts. Those
bursts that we talked about earlier. And
so if your bucket starts with 100, then
I can handle a burst of 100 at any given
moment, right? And then my refill rate,
this is like the steady number of
requests per minute or per time that I
can handle. So if your refill rate was,
you know, uh 60 uh 60 a minute, then
we're going to add one new token every
minute. And that means that our steady
rate is going to be run one request a
minute, right? And each time a request
comes in, we pull it out. And so an
example, a bucket holds, like I just
said, 100 tokens. This is going to allow
bursts of up to 100. If the refill rate
was 10 tokens per minute, this is a
steady rate of 10 requests a minute. And
then clients can make a 100 requests
immediately, but then they'll need to
wait for the bucket to refill and
they'll be at that slower rate. And so
this is really great because it handles
that sustained load via our refill rate
and the temporary bursts by our bucket
capacity. It's also shockingly simple to
implement. You just need to track the
tokens and the last refill time for
every given client. So again, just two
numbers, but the challenge is choosing
obviously your right bucket size and
your refill rate and how you handle cold
starts and things like this. Um, but
it's a pretty elegant algorithm and it's
the one that we're going to to choose
for our design here. So we understand
how the token bucket algorithm works
conceptually. But where and how do we
actually store each user's bucket,
right? How would we actually implement
this? Each bucket needs to track two
pieces of data. the current token count
and the last refill time stamp. And the
state needs to be shared across all the
different instances of the API gateway.
And so importantly, in a real production
system, you're going to have multiple of
these gateways. And so they need to
share some global state. If they don't,
then we run into the same problem that
we talked about earlier when we sh
stored specific uh rate limiters inside
of each microser respectively. And so
what we can do is we can pull the rate
limiter state out into an in-memory
cache something like Reddus. And so
these token counts, these token counts
and the last refill rate, all of that
state can be shared here in Reddus such
that even though we have multiple
gateways, they'll all still going to
read that same shared state. And so what
actually is going to happen here? Well,
maybe let's let's write this out for
extreme clarity. First a request is
going to come in of course. The second
thing is that the gateway is going to
fetch the token. And last
and typing while you guys all watch is
always difficult from Reddus.
Okay. And so in Reddus we can use what's
called an hm getit. And so what an hm
getit is it allows you to get the values
of multiple keys. And so we can say for
Alice's bucket, we want the tokens and
the last refill, right? So see that
command there? That's pretty great.
We're just saying in one command, give
me her current tokens and the last time
that it was refilled. Cool. And then
what we can do then is calculate based
on when her last refill time was, how
many tokens we need to add to her
bucket. And so this is really simple.
So, if Alice's bucket was last updated
30 seconds ago and her refill rate is
one token every second, then the gateway
is going to need to add 30 tokens to her
current count, right? So maybe her
current count was 20. The last refill
rate was 30 seconds ago. We refill at
one every second. So now the count is
50, right? So the next step here is
update counts based on rate and last
last refill.
[Music]
Great. Right. And then of course we're
going to respond pass or fail based on
if token after the refill or excuse me
if kind of tokens
after that refill is greater than zero.
Are there any tokens in the bucket given
what was in the bucket and how much
should have been refilled since the last
time that we checked this. Are there
greater than zero tokens? If yes then we
can pass. Right. And then the fifth
thing is to update the bucket status.
And so this is where we will write back
and update the token count to whatever
that new token count is. Update whatever
the the last or update the last refill
time to whatever the current time stamp
is. Right? So make sure that everything
gets updated. That's the general flow.
But importantly, hopefully this makes
sense so far. There's a race condition,
right? So I want you to imagine I want
you to imagine the following. Let me try
to illustrate this. I have gateway A and
I have gateway B. And Alice sends in two
requests. One request hits A, one
request hits B. They both go and read
Reddus for our token counts. Right? So
they both go and say, "What is my
current token and my current last refill
rate?" Well, in both cases, they're
going to read the same value. That value
might be one, right? It comes back as
one. They both check. Maybe the last
time we checked was a second ago. There
have been no more tokens added. So they
both read. They both say, "Okay, it's
one that's greater than zero. We're
going to accept." They both accept and
they both go right to Reddus. Maybe this
one writes a nancond before than this
one. So this one overwrites the
previous. Right? The important bit here
is that the race condition is that we
have this read after write problem. You
can have the read from a from gateway a
then the read from gateway b then the
right from a then the write from b when
those two things the read and the right
for each have to happen atomically right
and so the key is that these things the
one read from reddus and the two write
back to reddus has to be atomic in a
postgress database or anything this is
done of course like via transactions
with locking as well in the case of
reddus it supports atomic transactions
and it's single threaded which actually
makes this a little bit easier and it's
something called Luis scripting. Louis
scripting. And so I'm not going to go
into too much detail here, but the
general essence is that you can have all
of these uh Reddus commands, this hm
getit, the h set in order to update the
token counts all via a single reddus uh
reddice or excuse me, a single reddis
luis script, right? And then it'll go
over the wire. It'll do the read and
write all in one instance and then
return to you whether or not you should
pass or not. And that all happens
atomically and you don't have the race
condition. It's basically like one one
does everything and the other one waits
until the other one is completely
finished. Okay, hopefully that makes
sense. Um, okay, fantastic. So, what
have we done here? Coming back, we have
now covered our first and our second
functional requirement. All that's left
is that we need to return proper error
headers and status codes. And this is
this is pretty straightforward. This is
the easiest one here. Um,
I guess there is one decision that we
want to make. Uh, and that one decision
is that if a request, if we've exceeded
a rate limit, what do we do? Do we
reject immediately or do we cue it and
wait and try to handle it later? This
might seem obvious to many of you
listening, and I've almost been alluding
to this throughout. We're going to take
the approach of what's called fail fast.
And so, if we exceed the limit, we're
immediately going to send a failure back
to the user. We're not going to cue it.
In a system like this, queueing doesn't
make any sense. If a user is asking for
posts to view their posts, we cue it.
They're waiting and waiting and waiting.
They think something is broken anyway.
They hit the button again to try to view
their post again. Now we just have a
bunch of requests uh sitting in our
queue and a backlog is growing. It
becomes an even larger issue. And so
there are niche cases where queuing
makes sense like for batch processing
systems that can afford to wait. This is
usually like intra service
communication. But for the interactive
fast API like we have here, this fast
failure fail fast is the most common and
the right choice. Um, but how do we make
sure then that our response is actually
helpful? Well, the first thing that's
worth noting that you're definitely
going to want to know for an interview
is that the HTTP status code that you're
going to send on failure is a 429.
429 means too many requests and it is
the standard HTTP status code that is
used for exactly this. when you want to
rate limit somebody because they've had
so many requests, you send back a 429.
Um, but there's some additional headers
that are best practice that you want to
send back to the client as well. Forgive
me, I'm going to copy and paste it so
you guys don't have to watch me fumble
through typing anymore. Let me put them
here. Right. So, you want to send back
probably three additional things. The X
rate limit limit. This is the rate limit
ceiling for the requests. Right? So if
you can have 100 per minute, that's what
you're going to put in here. The x rate
limit remaining, this is the number of
requests left in the current window. Of
course, the notion of a current window
will depend on your algorithm. So this
can get a little bit funky, but you want
to give them some notion of where they
are. And then the rate limit reset, when
is this going to reset? Um, there's
other ones like retry after is a common
one that's added here too. Retry after.
This will say, you know, try again in 60
seconds.
Now most importantly in your interview
you should know 429. I think
interviewers expect you to know the the
response code is 429. But when it comes
to like memorizing rate limit limit rate
limit remaining rate limit reset retry
after. Don't stress it. You do not need
to memorize these in an interview. I
would say something like the following.
I would say I'm going to make sure that
I return a 429 status code with the
appropriate headers. Like some headers
that can let the the user know when they
can try again or how many are are
remaining. Pretty clear.
So we have our high level design in
place. We're feeling pretty good about
it. We chose our algorithm. The basics
are all working here. But now we need to
go back to our delivery framework. And
next up is our deep dives. And so this
is where we uh go one by one through our
non-functional requirements in order to
expand upon our design to make sure that
each of those non-functional
requirements are satisfied. And then we
can really feel good about what we put
here. So, I'm going to move some of this
around just so that we have a bit more
space. You guys will have this uh
whiteboard linked below in the
description for anybody that wants to
reference it.
Now, I'm going to go a little bit out of
order when we talk about our
non-functional requirements. I'm
actually going to work with scalability
first. We want 1 million requests per
second. And if you come back to our
current design, it should be relatively
clear why this won't scale to a million
requests per second. And the reason is
that we have just this single Reddus
instance. And so Reddus can handle, you
know, somewhere on the order of
depending on the hardware, maybe a
100,000
requests per second or operations per
second. And that's a tenth of what we
need to be able to support. But of
course, if you remember what we actually
need to do, we need to do an HM get and
we need to do an HM set. We need to do
both of those things for every call. So
that's two operations. Uh so maybe we
can even say that with what we have we
can support 50k requests per second. And
what we need to do then is we need to
shard. And sharding of course is the
strategy for which we can introduce
um more instances and shard the data
across those instances. Okay. So you can
take a large collection of data and then
shard the keys of that data across
multiple reddus instances. To put that
far more clearly, Alice might be on
Reddus instance one, but Bob's bucket
might be on Reddus instance two. Okay?
And so, let me demonstrate that here by
adding a bunch of those. We need a
million requests per second. And so, if
we have 1 million divided by our 50K,
well, this is 20. So, we'll need at
least
20 of these. Maybe we want to tell the
interviewer that we want a little bit of
room for overhead, so we'd have more
than that. But now the question becomes
how do we shard? And this is important
because the gateway always needs to know
that I just got Alice's request. So I
need to look in whichever Reddus
instance has Alice's bucket. If we just
checked a random bucket, then we might
not have Alice. And if we just
replicated all the data to each of these
buckets, well, we're in the same
problem, right? All of the buckets have
all of the data. Um, and so we might run
into issues of the actual amount of size
that we're storing. These are in memory.
So 64 GB, maybe go up to 10 and
something gigabytes, right? But we can't
store an infinite amount of data. So how
do we want to shard? Well, you obviously
want to shard based on whatever your
client ID is. In this case, the user ID
or the IP address or the API key. And
you can use something like consistent
hashing. I'll try to remember to put a
link to our consistent hashing video
somewhere on the screen now so you can
click on it if you're not familiar with
consistent hashing. Um, but in reality,
what you'd probably end up doing if you
are using Reddus is that you would use
what's called Reddis cluster. And Reddis
cluster manages this kind of sharding
for you. Um, and it does this not
actually using consistent hashing. It
uses what's called hash slots. And so it
has something like 60,000 hash slots
that it distributes across each of these
different Reddus nodes. It handles the
distribution into which hash slot any
given user is in and thus which Reddice
node they're in. Um and then it will all
be handled within what is called as I
said reddis cluster and so that would be
an easy way to handle this but the main
conceptual thing for you to know into
your in your interview is that we need
multiple instances and thus we need to
shard right easy enough.
Um now the next thing that we should
talk about then um again I'm going out
of order is the availability over
consistency and so how do we ensure that
we have high availability and that we're
also fault tolerant right and so if we
come back here what happens if Reddus
fails what happens if any of these
particular instances fail if Alice's
bucket is on this particular node and
this node fails well then now Alice
can't be rate limited okay and so the
first thing that we might want to talk
about is well what happens if that did
happen and then we can talk about how we
want to prevent it and so if that did
happen then we have two options. Option
one is fail open and option two is fail
close. This is common terminology when
you discuss rate limiters. Fail open
means our rate limiter is down and thus
every single request should get through.
Fail close is the opposite. Our rate
limiter is down and now no requests
should get through. And so you'll
probably want to talk to your
interviewer in order to understand the
requirements of this particular system.
We've understood that we're designing a
rate limiter for some sort of a social
network. And so in the case of failing
open, we would be kind of no longer
protecting all of the services that we
were here to protect. And it may
introduce a bunch of issues downstream.
Like there was a rate limiter here for a
reason. And it's probably because there
are limits to how many times we can read
from our database or our cache or how
many uh you know times we can compute
something algorithmically within any of
our microservices given the limitations
that we have in CPU or even GPU
respectively. Right? So in our case if
we were to fail open we would basically
say just go for it send all requests and
then these microservices one by one
might be back here and might die and go
offline. we might have this cascading
set of failures that are even worse. On
the other hand, if we fail close, then
now our site is down and you're going to
have a bunch of users who are upset, who
are reporting, oh no, Facebook,
Instagram, whatever we're designing this
rate limit for is down and that's maybe
not good either. There's no right or
wrong answer. I think typically what
you're going to do here is you're going
to fail close. The responsibility of the
rate limiter is to protect the backend
services to some degree. uh and thus if
it's down then it needs to take what is
the strictest um protection mechanism
possible and that is to to reject
everything. Um I will note that there's
there's oftent times in real production
systems more sophisticated things that
you would do here than just this binary
fail open or close like you can keep
some state in the gateway. The the
gateways themselves of course have
memory and so maybe you have like a
single counter in order to do a fixed
window counter such that if these fell
off then you could fall back to maybe
the fixed window counter using the the
memory um within the gateway and then it
doesn't matter that we don't have the
coordination between multiple gateway
instances we talked before because it's
like this is just a temporary thing
while Reddis gets back up. It's better
than nothing. It's better than failing
open or failing close. At least we still
have some rate limiting capacity. So if
any of these go down, that's what we
would do. But more importantly, how do
we make sure that a I guess none of
these go down and two that you know if
they do go down, we get them up as as
quickly as possible. And the key as is
the case with most distributed systems
is replicas,
right? So we can we can configure a
replication factor such that each one of
our reddish shards each one of our nodes
here have one or even two replicas such
that all data that gets written to them
also then gets propagated to its replica
and if one of these were to go down
then its replica would be promoted and
all of the reads would then come to the
replica instead.
Now, similarly like we talked about with
um with sharding, Reddis cluster
actually supports this for you. And so
with Reddis cluster, sorry about that
noise in the background. There's some
construction going on. I'll see if I can
get that out in post. Um but similar to
to to sharding with Reddis cluster, you
can configure a number of these backups.
And these backups use async replication.
So it's not perfect. We're opting for
high availability instead of
consistency. That's the trade-off here.
So a write happens um if this fails you
know before the write gets written here
asynchronously then yeah we'll be
missing some data there but it's not the
end of the world like now we think Alice
is at 99 requests instead of 100 right
she got one extra request off of us but
no big deal so the key to uh the high
availability and the fault tolerance is
sharding and read replicas okay and
reddis cluster can satisfy both of those
now let's talk about the low latency
rate limit checks. So how do we make
sure that we're sub 10 millisecond
latency? Well, every single check now is
going to require this network round trip
to Reddus and this is going to add
latency to every single request of
course and so Reddus operations are
typically sub millisecond, but the
network overhead here can be in some
cases several milliseconds per request,
right? And then the fact that we have
you know these larger requests might
make them even slightly longer. Um, and
so the most important optimization that
you can do right here is what's called
connection pooling. And this is so
instead of establishing a new TCP
connection to Reddus for each rate limit
check, your API gateway is going to
maintain a pool of persistent
connections here. And this is going to
eliminate that TCP handshake overhead,
which can sometimes be 20 to even 50
milliseconds depending on your network
distance. Okay. Um, and we're just going
to reuse those same TCP connections.
Now, this is interesting to say in your
interview and you should talk to your
interviewer about kind of TCP connection
pooling, but note that most Reddus
clients will handle connection pooling
automatically for you. I don't know a
single one that doesn't. It would be
crazy if it doesn't. Um, but you may
need to tune the pool size based on your
request volume and the Reddus response
time. So, this is a good thing to know.
Um, but in your interviewer, you should
probably tell your interviewer that you
understand that you know this connection
pooling will likely be be handled for
you by whatever Reddus client you use.
The other additional interesting thing
to talk about here when it comes to
latency is the geographic distribution.
And so what you would want to do is you
want to make sure that your rate limiter
and even your gateway are as close to
your users as possible. And so if you
have users in Tokyo, then maybe you have
a gateway that is somewhere in Asia or
somewhere in Japan. And subsequently
Reddus, your Reddus instance is located
or colllocated with your gateway ideally
even in the same data center as close as
possible. Right? These two servers might
even be right next to each other to try
to minimize that latency as much as
humanly possible. At this point, we
should be feeling pretty good. We have
satisfied all of our functional
requirements. We've satisfied all of our
non-functional requirements. But there's
one more thing I want to talk to you all
about that that's pretty common as it
comes up in interviews. And I want to
make sure that you guys are as well
prepared as possible. And that's how do
we handle dynamic rule configurations.
And so right now we've just sort of
assumed that there were static rules
like maybe when the gateway was deployed
it had some basic rules which said the
token refill rate and you know the the
the the token count in the bucket and so
we always just use these rates these
hard-coded rates and if you ever want to
change it you would need to redeploy
your gateway. Now you could also store
them in Reddus. You could do a bunch of
different things, but we've assumed thus
far that they are static. And so what
happens if they were configurable as is
the case in most production systems? And
sometimes you want to have different
rules for different users and different
types of things like we talked about
with premium and otherwise. And so how
would you handle that? Well, let's talk
through a couple of options. The first
maybe silly option would be that you
your system has a database. This is a
database, I'm sure, that your
microservices are talking to. And it
could store something like last, you
know, whatever your rules are, which
premium users, last refill or excuse me,
refill rate, etc., right? And your
gateway could maybe just periodically
pull. And so maybe every 20 seconds it
pulls like this. Okay, that's an option.
Now, it's not an ideal option because a
we have this 20 seconds delay here or 10
seconds delay or even a 5-second delay
and you could make it 1 second, but now
you're just burning unnecessary gateway
CPU that should be doing other things in
order to do this constant pulling,
right? So, that's not great. You can
also of course just pull from Reddus
like you definitely don't need the
database in some of in each of these
Reddus shards have that key value with
all of the rules and periodically pull
in the rules. Maybe even each time you
check a rate limit request, check the
actual rules, right? Look up the key
that has the rules and find out if the
rules have changed at all. This is just
going to add additional operations to
every single check and it's going to
increase your latency unnecessarily
considering rules probably aren't going
to change that often. So it's an option
but again probably not the best option.
The best option is that you can use a
pushbase configuration and actually
zookeeper a bit outdated nowadays I must
admit or etc.
These are options here. The latter of
which kind of being a bit more invogue
than than the old school zookeeper, but
I think conceptually the same general
thing. And so what these are is that
these are designed in order to maintain
this distributed configuration
management. And so the rules can be
stored here. And not only can the
gateway when it comes online ask for the
rules and then store those rules
importantly in memory. And it's going to
keep those rules in memory. So it
doesn't have to do a network check every
time. It has those rules there. But it
can also subscribe to watch for changes.
And so what it can do is that then opens
up a persistent TCP connection such that
anytime a rule changes in Zookeeper that
this gateway wants to know about, it
gets pushed over that open TCP
connection and then the gateway can
update its rules in memory. And so this
saves all of the issues with the or
solves all of the issues with the
previous two approaches which is that we
don't have any additional latency or
network requests because the rules are
kept here and we don't have to pull.
Zookeeper is just going to push. It's
ready.
There you have it folks. At this point
we've satisfied our highle design and
our deep dives and we have a pretty
comprehensive design of a distributed
rate limiter. Now, if you are a
mid-level candidate, then the
expectation is that you're going to have
more 80% breadth and 20% depth. And so,
I would expect from you as an uh as an
interviewer, I would expect that you
understand the different rate limiting
algorithms and you make a choice and
justify that choice appropriately. You
might not be able to code them or know
them perfectly in depth, but
conceptually you should understand them.
You should understand that the rate
limiter would make the most sense
existing on the edge of our system and
you should propose something in order to
share state globally whether that's
reddis memcache or otherwise and be able
to justify why you're adding it. Beyond
there you should be able to answer my
questions as I probe as an interviewer
when I point out that there's
limitations with a single reddus
instance for example or when I ask
questions about what happens when
something goes down. You should be able
to problem solve and arrive at
reasonable answers given my probing and
me leading you to the answers. Now for
senior candidates on the hand I expect
you to be much more proactive. You're
identifying those issues proactively.
You're telling me the interviewer that
you recognize that a single reddest node
isn't going to cut it here. Here's the
math that proves why. And here's how
many shards I'm going to need and what
I'm going to shard on. Right? You're
going to be more proactive in those
ways. Talking to me about fault
tolerance, but all the things that could
potentially go wrong if the system gets
overwhelmed. failing open, failing
closed, etc. And then as a staff
candidate, realistically this question
is not asked nearly as often of staff
candidates. Um, it's a little bit maybe
kind of on the easier or medium side
maybe. But if you are asked this as a
staff candidate, I'm expecting a lot
more depth. I'm expecting you to
proactively lead through just about
everything that we've talked about here
maybe. U but then you'll also guide me
towards conversations of things that you
know really well. Maybe you have deep
experience of Reddis cluster and you can
tell me about times where you had to or
you accidentally or incorrectly managed
the connection pool size. Uh you made
mistakes there and why it's important
that it needs to be a particular size.
Or you proactively recognize the race
condition and you explain to me how
Lewis scripting is going to work in
order to solve the race condition.
Right? That's a little bit more of an
advanced concept. So uh that's how you
would break it down. Mid-level um senior
and staff respectively.
Um, let's see. Anything else that I want
to say here? I will put this diagram in
the description. So, if you want it, go
check it out there. I'll be posting more
videos. Plenty more videos on this
YouTube channel will be coming. And
maybe the last thing, we're so close to
100,000 subscribers at time of recording
this. If you liked it, please like,
subscribe, leave a comment down below.
I'll answer those. And uh, as always,
best of luck with your upcoming
interview. You guys are going to do
great. Take care.